docs: Design proposal for TTL scans (#863)
aquasecurity/starboard: docs/design/ttl_scans.md

# TTL scans

## Summary

Add an option to automatically delete old starboard scans, in this first version focus on vulnerability scans but in the long run we could add similar functionality to other reports as well.

## Motivation

In [537](https://github.com/aquasecurity/starboard/issues/537) we talk about a need to run nightly vulnerability scans of CVE:s.
This way we can make sure to get new CVE reports for long time running pods as well.

## Proposal

Add a feature feature flag of the operator, for example `--ttlVulnerabilityReport 24h`, this way we can add other ttl values for other reports as well.

> Adding this flag would add a spec/annotation to the generated VulnerabilityReport that we can look for.

Reviewer: Each VulnerabilityReport has `metadata.creationTimestamp` and `report.updateTimestamp`. Do you think we could use these properties to determine TTL without adding annotations? On the other hand the annotation is very verbose / explicit to indicate that this report has validity timestamp.

Reviewer 2: I think thats whats happening with kubernetes job type listed below. Following their pattern would be good. Adding a ttl 24h annotation, label, or spec entry, then comparing the current type with report.updateTimestamp + the ttl?

Using similar functionality as defined in [ttlAfterFinished](https://kubernetes.io/docs/concepts/workloads/controllers/ttlafterfinished/) for cronjob seems to be the most versatile option.

> Just like the [ttlAfterFinished controller](https://github.com/kubernetes/kubernetes/blob/2a821d787b7f21fbb399b0a0bf6d3fa0c79f4293/pkg/controller/ttlafterfinished/ttlafterfinished_controller.go) we should add it as a separate controller.

Reviewer: Just to confirm that we are talking about VulnerabilityReport controller here, right? And later on we could watch other kinds of security reports in a similar way.

Reviewer 2: Yeah. I think the idea here is to have one ttl controller for all reports, not taking each existing controller and adding ttl to them.

Author: Just like @kfox1111 writes this is a seperate controller. For now I think we should focus on VulnerabilityReport but In the long run I think this might be useful for other reports as well. For example: https://github.com/aquasecurity/starboard/pull/830

This is also why my idea is to use `--ttlVulnerabilityReport 24h` and not `ttlReport 24h` since then we will be able to configure different values for different reports.

This way it will be easy to extend to other reports as well.

## Alternatives

> Another "simpler" option could be to add the same feature flag `--ttlVulnerabilityReport 24h` but instead of doing a similar solution as defined in ttlAfterFinished we could create a cronjob/job that runs once an hour and check for the same annotation.

Reviewer: I really like the "event driven" approach described in the proposal. Especially to avoid deleting multiple VulnerabilityReports around the same time, which would create multiple (re)scan Jobs. Not sure how feasible is that, but more jitter in delete events the better overall.

With a CronJob we'd need to create it programmatically or add it as part of the installation descriptors. We'd also need a container and command to run it.

Reviewer 2: That may or may not be seen as a good thing depending on the user.

Some users might want to know that starting at some point in time (daily, weekly, whatever) that all scans have happened recently.

The operator one way or another will need to be stable in the face of a lot of new scan requests, so potentially triggering a lot of rescans needs to be handled anyway I think.

I guess the event based one (24h + age of object) can still be pretty easily be turned into the latter by just hard deleting all the reports with a cron job and skipping the TTL feature by an end user. So they are not mutually exclusive.

Reviewer: Let's see how the event drive approach is adapter. We can always think of enhancement and add CronJob if it's really needed.

# TTL scans

## Summary

> Add an option to automatically delete old starboard scans, in this first version focus on vulnerability scans but in the long run we could add similar functionality to other reports as well.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Add an option to automatically delete old security reports. In this first version focus on vulnerability reports but in the long run we could add similar functionality to other reports as well.
```

## Motivation

In [537](https://github.com/aquasecurity/starboard/issues/537) we talk about a need to run nightly vulnerability scans of CVE:s.
This way we can make sure to get new CVE reports for long time running pods as well.

## Proposal

Add a environment variable to the operator, for example `OPERATOR_VULNERABILITY_SCANNER_REPORT_TTL=86400`, this way we can add other ttl values for other reports as well.
Adding this environment variable would add a annotation to the generated VulnerabilityReport that we can look for.

Create a new controller that looks for changes in vulnerabilityreports and uses [RequeueAfter](https://pkg.go.dev/sigs.k8s.io/controller-runtime/pkg/reconcile#Result)

> to look through all existing vulnerabilityreports at startup of the operator but also monitor newly created reports and requeue them after need

Reviewer: I think that with RequeAfter property of reconciliation result we could avoid listing vulnerability reports at startup at all. The goal is to avoid batch processing as much as we can (especially on startup).

Therefore, I'd clarify that the annotation and the update timestamp is used to determine a TTL for a single report. If the report should be kept we adding it back to the work queue. Otherwise it's deleted.

Author: Rewrote the section and I hope It made it clearer.

> Using similar functionality as defined in [ttlAfterFinished](https://kubernetes.io/docs/concepts/workloads/controllers/ttlafterfinished/) for cronjob seems to be the most versatile option.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Using similar functionality as defined in [ttlAfterFinished](https://kubernetes.io/docs/concepts/workloads/controllers/ttlafterfinished/) for Jobs seems to be the most versatile option.
```

# TTL scans

## Summary

Add an option to automatically delete old starboard scans, in this first version focus on vulnerability scans but in the long run we could add similar functionality to other reports as well.

## Motivation

In [537](https://github.com/aquasecurity/starboard/issues/537) we talk about a need to run nightly vulnerability scans of CVE:s.
This way we can make sure to get new CVE reports for long time running pods as well.

## Proposal

> Add a environment variable to the operator, for example `OPERATOR_TTL_VULNERABILITY_SCANNER=24h`, this way we can add other ttl values for other reports as well.

Author: Sounds reasonable, I went with OPERATOR_VULNERABILITY_SCANNER_REPORT_TTL to make it super clear that is about the reports.

Adding this environment variable would add a annotation to the generated VulnerabilityReport that we can look for.

Using similar functionality as defined in [ttlAfterFinished](https://kubernetes.io/docs/concepts/workloads/controllers/ttlafterfinished/) for cronjob seems to be the most versatile option.

Just like the [ttlAfterFinished controller](https://github.com/kubernetes/kubernetes/blob/2a821d787b7f21fbb399b0a0bf6d3fa0c79f4293/pkg/controller/ttlafterfinished/ttlafterfinished_controller.go) we should add it as a separate controller.
This way it will be easy to extend to other reports as well.

> If the operator restarts the queue will disappear since we don't hold any state so we would have to scan all the available reports and calculate

Reviewer: We are using controller-runtime and its Reconciler abstraction. Can you elaborate how we're going to init the controller on startup? If we block the init for too longit won't scale with a number of VulnerabilityReports. On the other hand, I'm not sure we have "access" to work queue outside the Reconilation handler function.

Author: Spoken to a friend about this and he pointed out that we don't need to use the ttlAfterFinished solution.
Instead we can use the controller result. https://pkg.go.dev/sigs.k8s.io/controller-runtime/pkg/reconcile#Result

When we get a reconcile thanks to a vulnerability have been created we can go in and check the annotation `starboard.aquasecurity.github.io/report-ttl` and do the calculation on how long it should live.
and then just do a RequeueAfter and the controller will manage this magic for us :) 

```.go
type Result struct {
	// Requeue tells the Controller to requeue the reconcile key.  Defaults to false.
	Requeue bool

	// RequeueAfter if greater than 0, tells the Controller to requeue the reconcile key after the Duration.
	// Implies that Requeue is true, there is no need to set Requeue to true at the same time as RequeueAfter.
	RequeueAfter time.Duration
}
```

My understanding is that this also will be checked during startup of the controller if there is already existing reports.
Does this sound reasonable @danielpacak? If so I will update the document sometime after Christmas and see if I can create a PoC around it.

Reviewer: If we could use RequestAfter duration and confirm that existing VulnerabilityReports get listed by the controller manager that would be the best clean solution.

the ttl comparing it to `report.updateTimestamp`.

We could calculate the ttl without having creating a new annotation to the reports but the verbosity of showing the users how long each report
got a ttl outweighs the "issue" of generating a new annotation.

### Example

Below you can see a shortened version of the yaml. Notice the `metadata.annotations.ttlVulnerabilityReport` which is the new.

> The operator would automatically apply the `ttlVulnerabilityReport` annotation to all reports that it generates assuming that the environment variable is set.

Reviewer: According to [Syntax and character set](https://kubernetes.io/docs/concepts/overview/working-with-objects/annotations/#syntax-and-character-set) an annotation has prefix and name to avoid collisions.

Maybe we could use `starboard.aquasecurity.github.io/report-ttl` for any kind of security report managed by Starboard. WDYT?

Author: I know about this but for some reason I didn't think about it when writing the example... good catch and I have updated the PR accordingly.
